THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT, 2005
Act No. 42 of 2005
An Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, extent and commencement.
This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Definitions.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "adult" means a person who has completed his eighteenth year of age.
(b) "Appellate Authority" means an officer designated as such under section 16.
(c) "applicant" means a person who applies for employment under this Act.
(d) "Block" means a community development block in a district.
(e) "Central Council" means the Central Employment Guarantee Council constituted under section 10.
(f) "Central Government" means the Ministry of Rural Development of the Government of India.
(g) "District Programme Coordinator" means an officer designated as such under section 14.
(h) "employment" means the work provided to an applicant under this Act.
(i) "employment guarantee" means the guarantee of providing employment as specified in Schedule II.
(j) "Gram Panchayat" means a village panchayat constituted under any law for the time being in force relating to panchayats.
(k) "Gram Sabha" means a body consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of Panchayat at the village level.
(l) "household" means the members of a family related to each other by blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals or holding a common ration card.
(m) "implementing agency" means any department of the Central or State Government, Zila Parishad, Panchayat at intermediate level, Gram Panchayat, any body or authority established by or under any Central or State Act, or any organisation registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any other law for the time being in force, or any self-help group or co-operative society.
(n) "job card" means a card issued to a household under section 4.
(o) "Programme Officer" means an officer designated as such under section 15.
(p) "project" means a project for providing employment under this Act.
(q) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to this Act.
(r) "scheme" means a scheme made under this Act.
(s) "State Council" means a State Employment Guarantee Council constituted under section 12.
(t) "State Government" means the Government of a State and includes the Government of a Union territory having a Legislature.
(u) "unskilled manual work" means physical work which does not require any special skill or training.
(v) "wage rate" means the wage rate notified under section 6.
(w) "work" means any work which is permissible under Schedule I.

CHAPTER II - EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE

3. Guarantee of rural employment.
The State Government shall provide to every household in the rural areas of the State whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act.
The Central Government shall provide funds to the State Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI.
If the State Government is unable to provide employment under sub-section (1) within fifteen days of receipt of application or from the date when the employment is sought in case of an advance application, whichever is later, the applicant shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance with the provisions of Schedule II.
The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance under sub-section (3) shall be limited to the period for which employment was not provided from the date of receipt of application.

4. Registration of households.
Any adult member of a household may apply to the Gram Panchayat for registration of his household. The Gram Panchayat, after making such enquiry as it deems fit, shall register the household and issue a job card to the household. The job card shall be issued within fifteen days of the application. The job card shall contain such details as may be prescribed.

5. Right to apply for employment.
Any adult member of a registered household may apply for employment under this Act to the Programme Officer or to the Gram Panchayat. The application for employment shall be for at least fourteen days of continuous work. The employment shall be provided within fifteen days of receipt of the application or from the date when the employment is sought in case of an advance application, whichever is later.

6. Wage rate.
The Central Government shall notify the wage rate for different areas. The wage rate shall not be less than sixty rupees per day. The wage rate shall be revised from time to time. The wages shall be paid on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which such work was done.

7. Payment of wages.
Wages shall be paid to the worker directly or through their bank account or post office account. No wages shall be paid through a contractor. The wages shall be paid within fifteen days of the completion of work. If wages are not paid within fifteen days, the worker shall be entitled to compensation as prescribed.

8. Unemployment allowance.
If the State Government fails to provide employment within fifteen days of receipt of application, the applicant shall be entitled to unemployment allowance. The unemployment allowance shall be paid at the rate of not less than one-fourth of the wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year.

CHAPTER III - WORKS UNDER THE SCHEME

16. Permissible works.
The following categories of works may be taken up under the Scheme: water conservation and water harvesting; drought proofing including afforestation and tree plantation; irrigation canals including micro and minor irrigation works; provision of irrigation facility to land owned by households belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes or to land of beneficiaries of land reforms or to the land of the beneficiaries under the Indira Awaas Yojana; renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of tanks; land development; flood control and protection works including drainage in waterlogged areas; rural connectivity to provide all-weather access; construction of Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendra as knowledge resource centre at the Gram Panchayat level; agriculture and allied activities; works in coastal areas; maintenance of rural public assets created under the Scheme.

CHAPTER IV - GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL

17. Social audit.
The Gram Sabha shall conduct regular social audits of all the projects taken up under the Scheme within the Gram Panchayat. The Gram Panchayat shall facilitate the conduct of social audits. The social audit shall be conducted at least once in every six months.

18. Grievance redressal.
Every State Government shall put in place a grievance redressal mechanism for the purposes of this Act. Any person aggrieved by the non-payment of wages or unemployment allowance or any other matter relating to the implementation of this Act may make a complaint to the Programme Officer. The Programme Officer shall dispose of the complaint within seven days of receipt. If the complaint is not disposed of within seven days or the complainant is not satisfied with the decision, he may appeal to the District Programme Coordinator. The District Programme Coordinator shall dispose of the appeal within thirty days.

CHAPTER V - FUNDING

22. Central funding.
The Central Government shall bear the cost of wages for unskilled manual work; seventy-five per cent of the cost of material and wages for skilled and semi-skilled workers; administrative expenses of the Central Council; administrative expenses of the Central Government relating to this Act.
The State Government shall bear the cost of unemployment allowance; twenty-five per cent of the cost of material and wages for skilled and semi-skilled workers; administrative expenses of the State Council; administrative expenses of the State Government relating to this Act.

SCHEDULE I - PERMISSIBLE WORKS
The following works are permissible under the Scheme: water conservation and water harvesting structures; watershed management works; micro and minor irrigation works; renovation of traditional water bodies; land development works; flood control and protection works; rural connectivity works; construction of buildings for Gram Panchayats; agriculture and allied activities; works in coastal areas.

SCHEDULE II - UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE
If the State Government fails to provide employment within fifteen days of receipt of application, the applicant shall be entitled to unemployment allowance at the rate of not less than one-fourth of the wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year. The unemployment allowance shall be paid by the State Government from its own funds.
